docs/examples/ex18.rst, before:

.. note::
   This example requires the external package `dmsh <https://pypi.org/project/dmsh/>`_.

Stokes equations
----------------

This solves for the same creeping flow problem as in :ref:`ex18` but in the primitive
variables, i.e. velocity and pressure instead of the stream-function.  These are
governed by the Stokes momentum

.. math::
    0 = -\rho^{-1}\nabla p + \boldsymbol{f} + \nu\Delta\boldsymbol{u}

and continuity equations

.. math::
    \nabla\cdot\boldsymbol{u} = 0.

This is an example of a mixed problem because it contains two
different kinds of unknowns; pairs of elements for them have to be
chosen carefully.  One of the simplest workable choices is the
Taylor--Hood element: :code:`ElementVectorH1(ElementTriP2())` for velocity
and :code:`ElementTriP1()` for pressure.

This example also demonstrates the use of the external pure-Python package
`dmsh <https://pypi.org/project/dmsh/>`_ to generate a :class:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri`.

Once the velocity has been found, the stream-function :math:`\psi` can
be calculated by solving the Poisson problem

.. math::
    -\Delta\psi = \mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u}.

The boundary conditions are that the stream-function be constant
around the impermeable perimeter; this constant can be taken as zero
without loss of generality.  In the weak formulation

.. math::
    \left(\nabla\phi, \nabla\psi\right) = \left(\phi, \mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u}\right) \quad \forall \phi \in H^1_0(\Omega),

the right-hand side can be converted using Green's theorem and the
no-slip condition to not involve the derivatives of the velocity:

.. math::
     \left(\phi, \mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u}\right) = \left(\boldsymbol{rot}\,\phi, \boldsymbol{u}\right)

where :math:`\boldsymbol{rot}` is the adjoint of :math:`\mathrm{rot}`:

.. math::
    \boldsymbol{rot}\,\phi \equiv \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial y}\hat{i} - \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial x}\hat{j}.


.. figure:: taylorhood_stream-function.png

   Stream function

.. figure:: taylorhood_velocity.png

   Velocity

.. figure:: taylorhood_pressure.png

   Pressure
    
The complete source code reads as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ex18.py
    :linenos:

Commit message:

Updates to the docs. asm() takes now also plain ndarray. Added colorbar flag to MeshTri.plot.

docs/examples/ex18.rst, after:

.. note::
   This example requires the external package `dmsh <https://pypi.org/project/dmsh/>`_.

Stokes equations
----------------

This solves for the creeping flow problem in the primitive variables,
i.e. velocity and pressure instead of the stream-function.  These are governed
by the Stokes momentum

.. math::
    0 = -\rho^{-1}\nabla p + \boldsymbol{f} + \nu\Delta\boldsymbol{u}

and continuity equations

.. math::
    \nabla\cdot\boldsymbol{u} = 0.

This is an example of a mixed problem because it contains two
different kinds of unknowns; pairs of elements for them have to be
chosen carefully.  One of the simplest workable choices is the
Taylor--Hood element: :math:`P_2` for velocity
and :math:`P_1` for pressure.

Once the velocity has been found, the stream-function :math:`\psi` can
be calculated by solving the Poisson problem

.. math::
    -\Delta\psi = \mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u},

where :math:`\mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u} \equiv
\partial u_y/\partial x - \partial u_x/\partial y`.
The boundary conditions are that the stream-function is constant
around the impermeable perimeter; this constant can be taken as zero
without loss of generality.  In the weak formulation

.. math::
    \left(\nabla\phi, \nabla\psi\right) = \left(\phi, \mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u}\right) \quad \forall \phi \in H^1_0(\Omega),

the right-hand side can be converted using Green's theorem and the
no-slip condition to not involve the derivatives of the velocity:

.. math::
     \left(\phi, \mathrm{rot}\,\boldsymbol{u}\right) = \left(\boldsymbol{rot}\,\phi, \boldsymbol{u}\right)

where :math:`\boldsymbol{rot}` is the adjoint of :math:`\mathrm{rot}`:

.. math::
    \boldsymbol{rot}\,\phi \equiv \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial y}\hat{i} - \frac{\partial\phi}{\partial x}\hat{j}.


The complete source code reads as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ex18.py
    :linenos:
