Conjugate heat transfer
-----------------------

.. note::
   This example requires the external package
   `pygmsh <https://pypi.org/project/pygmsh/>`_.


In this example, the forced convection example :ref:`forcedconvection` is extended to conjugate heat transfer by giving a finite thickness and thermal conductivity to one of the walls.

The example is modified to a configuration for which there is a fully developed solution which can be found in closed form: given a uniform (but possibly different) heat flux over each of the walls, the temperature field asymptotically is the superposition of a uniform longitudinal gradient and a transverse profile; here the analysis of a pipe of circular section (Bird, Stewart, & Lightfoot 1960, §3–13) is modified for a planar duct (Mallinson, McBain, & Brown 2019).  The two-dimensional equation in the fluid :math:`-1 < y < 1`

.. math::
   \mathrm{Pe} \left(1 - y^2)\right) \frac{\partial T}{\partial x} =
   \nabla \cdot k \nabla  T

admits solutions of the form

.. math::
   T(x, y) = \frac{3x}{4\mathrm{Pe}} - \frac{(5-y^2)(1-y^2)}{16} - \frac{y}{2}.

Here Pe is the dimensionless Péclet number and :math:`k` the ratio of the thermal conductivity of the solid to that of the fluid.

This fully developed solution applies throughout the domain if it is specified along the fluid and solid inlet :math:`x=0`, if the ceiling is insulated :math:`\partial T/\partial y = 0` on :math:`y = 1`, if the floor is uniformly heated :math:`k\partial t/\partial y = 1`: on :math:`y = -2`, and if the longitudinal gradient is applied as a uniform Neumann condition on the outlet, :math:`\partial T/\partial x = 3/4\mathrm{Pe}` on :math:`x = \ell`.

In conjugate heat transfer, part of the domain is advection–conduction (like :ref:forcedconvection:) while the rest is pure conduction; the main difficulty is specifying different governing equations on different subdomains.  One way to do this has been demonstrated in :ref:`subdomain`: restricting an operator to a subdomain by only assembling it over a basis restricted to the elements belonging to a particular subdomain.

* Bird, R. B., W. E. Stewart, & E. N. Lightfoot (1960). Transport Phenomena. New York: Wiley
* Mallinson, S. G., McBain, G. D. & Brown, B. R. (2019). `Conjugate
  heat transfer in thermal inkjet printheads
  <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334028691_Conjugate_Heat_Transfer_in_Thermal_Inkjet_Printheads>`_.
  14th International Conference on Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics and
  Thermodynamics, Wicklow, Ireland.

.. literalinclude:: ex28.py
   :linenos:
