examples/ex02.rst, before:

Kirchhoff plate
---------------

This example demonstrates the solution of a slightly more complicated problem
with multiple boundary conditions and a fourth-order differential operator. We
consider the Kirchhoff plate bending problem which finds its applications in
solid mechanics. For a stationary plate of constant thickness
:math:`d`, the governing equation reads: find the deflection :math:`u : \Omega \rightarrow \mathbb{R}` that satisfies

.. math::
    \frac{Ed^3}{12(1-\nu^2)} \Delta^2 u = f, \quad \text{in $\Omega$},

where :math:`\Omega = (0,1)^2`, :math:`f` is a perpendicular force,
:math:`E` and :math:`\nu` are material parameters.
In this example, we analyse a :math:`1\,\text{m}^2` plate of steel with thickness :math:`d=0.1\,\text{m}`.
The Young's modulus of steel is :math:`E = 200 \cdot 10^9\,\text{Pa}` and Poisson
ratio :math:`\nu = 0.3`.

In reality, the operator

.. math::
    \frac{Ed^3}{12(1-\nu^2)} \Delta^2 

is a combination of multiple first-order operators:

.. math::
    \boldsymbol{K}(u) = - \boldsymbol{\varepsilon}(\nabla u), \quad \boldsymbol{\varepsilon}(\boldsymbol{w}) = \frac12(\nabla \boldsymbol{w} + \nabla \boldsymbol{w}^T),

.. math::
    \boldsymbol{M}(u) = \frac{d^3}{12} \mathbb{C} \boldsymbol{K}(u), \quad \mathbb{C} \boldsymbol{T} = \frac{E}{1+\nu}\left( \boldsymbol{T} + \frac{\nu}{1-\nu}(\text{tr}\,\boldsymbol{T})\boldsymbol{I}\right),

where :math:`\boldsymbol{I}` is the identity matrix. In particular,

.. math::
    \frac{Ed^3}{12(1-\nu^2)} \Delta^2 u = - \text{div}\,\textbf{div}\,\boldsymbol{M}(u).

There are several boundary conditions that the problem can take.
The *fully clamped* boundary condition reads

.. math::
    u = \frac{\partial u}{\partial n} = 0.

Moreover, the *simply supported* boundary condition reads

.. math::
    u = 0, \quad M_{nn}(u)=0,

where :math:`M_{nn} = \boldsymbol{n} \cdot (\boldsymbol{M} \boldsymbol{n})`.
Finally, the *free* boundary condition reads

.. math::
    M_{nn}(u)=0, \quad V_{n}(u)=0,

where :math:`V_n = \boldsymbol{V} \cdot \boldsymbol{n}` and
:math:`\boldsymbol{V}` is the `Kirchhoff shear force <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.08396.pdf>`_. The exact
definition is not needed here as this boundary condition is a
natural one.

The correct weak formulation for the problem is: find :math:`u \in V` such that

.. math::
    (\boldsymbol{M}(u),\boldsymbol{K}(v)) = (f, v) \quad \forall v \in V,

where :math:`V` is now a subspace of :math:`H^2` with the essential boundary
conditions for :math:`u` and :math:`\frac{\partial u}{\partial n}`.

Instead of constructing a subspace for :math:`H^2`, we discretise
the problem using the non-conforming Morley finite element which
is a piecewise quadratic :math:`C^0` element.  We begin by
creating a simple symmetric mesh for the unit square.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 1-5

After creating the mesh, we evaluate the finite element basis at the global
quadrature points. This could be done as before but we demonstrate instead
the extended syntax of :class:`~skfem.assembly.InteriorBasis`
constructor which allows the user to input an object of type
:class:`~skfem.mapping.Mapping` and the integration order as
optional parameters:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 8-9

The rather complicated bilinear form can be written in several
parts:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 11-32

As loading, we shall consider a distributed force of :math:`1\,\text{MPa}`,
i.e. :math:`f=10^6\,\text{Pa}`.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 34-36

Assembling the stiffness matrix and the load vector
is now two calls to :func:`~skfem.assembly.asm`:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 38-39

Next we demonstrate a convenient way of setting essential
boundary conditions on different parts of the boundary. We begin
by defining :class:`skfem.mesh.Submesh` objects that contain
the nodes and the facets belonging to the respective boundaries:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 41-45

The corresponding degree-of-freedom numbers (i.e. rows and columns
of the stiffness matrix) can be found using
:meth:`~skfem.assembly.GlobalBasis.get_dofs` which returns a
dictionary of tuples. These tuples contain the degree-of-freedom
numbers corresponding to different topological entities (nodes,
facets, etc.) of the submesh. In the following, we continue by
constructing an array of boundary degree-of-freedom numbers:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 47-54

The solution of the linear system is now done similarly as in the
Poisson example.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 56-58

As the Morley element is based on piecewise quadratic basis
functions, we cannot appreciate the discrete solution
unless we further refine the mesh for visualisation
purposes. The refine and interpolation is done using
:meth:`~skfem.assembly.InteriorBasis.refinterp` as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 60-64

.. figure:: ../examples/ex02_solution.png

    The visualised solution of example 2.

The complete source code reads as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :linenos:

Commit message:

Simplified the writing in example 2.

examples/ex02.rst, after:

Kirchhoff plate
---------------

This example demonstrates the solution of a slightly more complicated problem
with multiple boundary conditions and a fourth-order differential operator. We
consider the `Kirchhoff plate bending problem
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff%E2%80%93Love_plate_theory>`_ which
finds its applications in solid mechanics. For a stationary plate of constant
thickness :math:`d`, the governing equation reads: find the deflection :math:`u
: \Omega \rightarrow \mathbb{R}` that satisfies

.. math::
    \frac{Ed^3}{12(1-\nu^2)} \Delta^2 u = f, \quad \text{in $\Omega$},

where :math:`\Omega = (0,1)^2`, :math:`f` is a perpendicular force,
:math:`E` and :math:`\nu` are material parameters.
In this example, we analyse a :math:`1\,\text{m}^2` plate of steel with thickness :math:`d=0.1\,\text{m}`.
The Young's modulus of steel is :math:`E = 200 \cdot 10^9\,\text{Pa}` and Poisson
ratio :math:`\nu = 0.3`.

In reality, the operator

.. math::
    \frac{Ed^3}{12(1-\nu^2)} \Delta^2 

is a combination of multiple first-order operators:

.. math::
    \boldsymbol{K}(u) = - \boldsymbol{\varepsilon}(\nabla u), \quad \boldsymbol{\varepsilon}(\boldsymbol{w}) = \frac12(\nabla \boldsymbol{w} + \nabla \boldsymbol{w}^T),

.. math::
    \boldsymbol{M}(u) = \frac{d^3}{12} \mathbb{C} \boldsymbol{K}(u), \quad \mathbb{C} \boldsymbol{T} = \frac{E}{1+\nu}\left( \boldsymbol{T} + \frac{\nu}{1-\nu}(\text{tr}\,\boldsymbol{T})\boldsymbol{I}\right),

where :math:`\boldsymbol{I}` is the identity matrix. In particular,

.. math::
    \frac{Ed^3}{12(1-\nu^2)} \Delta^2 u = - \text{div}\,\textbf{div}\,\boldsymbol{M}(u).

There are several boundary conditions that the problem can take.
The *fully clamped* boundary condition reads

.. math::
    u = \frac{\partial u}{\partial n} = 0.

Moreover, the *simply supported* boundary condition reads

.. math::
    u = 0, \quad M_{nn}(u)=0,

where :math:`M_{nn} = \boldsymbol{n} \cdot (\boldsymbol{M} \boldsymbol{n})`.
Finally, the *free* boundary condition reads

.. math::
    M_{nn}(u)=0, \quad V_{n}(u)=0,

where :math:`V_n = \boldsymbol{V} \cdot \boldsymbol{n}` and
:math:`\boldsymbol{V}` is the `Kirchhoff shear force <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.08396.pdf>`_. The exact
definition is not needed here as this boundary condition is a
natural one.

The correct weak formulation for the problem is: find :math:`u \in V` such that

.. math::
    (\boldsymbol{M}(u),\boldsymbol{K}(v)) = (f, v) \quad \forall v \in V,

where :math:`V` is now a subspace of :math:`H^2` with the essential boundary
conditions for :math:`u` and :math:`\frac{\partial u}{\partial n}`.

Instead of constructing a subspace for :math:`H^2`, we discretise
the problem using the non-conforming Morley finite element which
is a piecewise quadratic :math:`C^0` element.  We begin by
creating a simple symmetric mesh for the unit square.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 1-5

After creating the mesh, we evaluate the finite element basis at the global
quadrature points. We demonstrate
the extended syntax of :class:`~skfem.assembly.InteriorBasis`
constructor which allows the user to input an object of type
:class:`~skfem.mapping.Mapping` and the integration order as
optional parameters:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 8-9

The integration order refers to the highest order of exactly integrated
polynomials. In this example, quadratic polynomials can be integrated exactly,
which is required in the right hand side linear form.

The rather complicated bilinear form :math:`(\boldsymbol{M}(u),
\boldsymbol{K}(v))` can be written in several parts:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 11-32

As loading, we shall consider a distributed force of :math:`1\,\text{MPa}`,
i.e. :math:`f=10^6\,\text{Pa}`.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 34-36

Assembling the stiffness matrix and the load vector
is now two calls to :func:`~skfem.assembly.asm`:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 38-39

Next we demonstrate setting different boundary conditions on different parts of
the boundary.  An easy way is to create :class:`~skfem.mesh.Submesh` objects
for each boundary:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 41-45

The corresponding degree-of-freedom numbers (i.e. rows and columns
of the stiffness matrix) can be found using
:meth:`~skfem.assembly.GlobalBasis.get_dofs`.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 47-54

The solution of the linear system is now done similarly as in the
Poisson example.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 56-58

Morley element uses quadratic basis
functions, and we cannot fully appreciate the discrete solution
unless we refine the mesh for visualisation. This is done using
:meth:`~skfem.assembly.InteriorBasis.refinterp` as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :lines: 60-64

.. figure:: ../examples/ex02_solution.png

    The visualised solution of example 2.

The complete source code reads as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex02.py
    :linenos:
