examples/ex18.rst, before:

Creeping flow
-------------

The stream-function :math:`\psi` for two-dimensional creeping flow is
governed by the biharmonic equation

.. math::  
    \nu \Delta^2\psi = \mathop{rot} f

where :math:`\nu` is the kinematic viscosity (assumed constant),
:math:`f` the volumetric body-force, and :math:`\mathop{rot} f =
(\partial f/\partial y, -\partial f/\partial x)`.  The boundary
conditions at a wall are that :math:`\psi` be constant (the wall is
impermeable) and that the normal component of its gradient vanish (no
slip).  Thus, the boundary value problem is analogous to that of
bending a clamped plate, and may be treated with Morley elements as in
`ex10`.

Here we consider a buoyancy force :math:`f = x\hat{j}`, which arises in
the Boussinesq approximation of natural convection with a horizontal
temperature gradient (`Batchelor 1954
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/qam/64563>`_).

For a circular cavity of radius :math:`a`, the problem admits a
polynomial solution with circular stream-lines:

.. math::
    \psi = \left\{1 - (x^2+y^2)/a^2\right\}^2 / 64.

The resulting stream-lines and velocity vectors are given
in the following figures:

.. figure:: ../examples/ex18-stream-lines.png

.. figure:: ../examples/ex18-velocity-vectors.png

The complete source code reads as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex18.py
    :linenos:

Commit message:

Made ex18 example more consistent with the others in user doc.

examples/ex18.rst, after:

Creeping flow
-------------

The stream-function :math:`\psi` for two-dimensional creeping flow is
governed by the biharmonic equation

.. math::  
    \nu \Delta^2\psi = \mathrm{rot}\,f

where :math:`\nu` is the kinematic viscosity (assumed constant),
:math:`f` the volumetric body-force, and :math:`\mathrm{rot}\,f =
(\partial f/\partial y, -\partial f/\partial x)`.  The boundary
conditions at a wall are that :math:`\psi` is constant (the wall is
impermeable) and that the normal component of its gradient vanishes (no
slip).  Thus, the boundary value problem is analogous to that of
bending a clamped plate, and may be treated with Morley elements as in
`Kirchhoff plate`_ example.

Here we consider a buoyancy force :math:`f = x\hat{j}`, which arises in
the Boussinesq approximation of natural convection with a horizontal
temperature gradient (`Batchelor 1954
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/qam/64563>`_).

For a circular cavity of radius :math:`a`, the problem admits a
polynomial solution with circular stream-lines:

.. math::
    \psi = \left\{1 - (x^2+y^2)/a^2\right\}^2 / 64.

The resulting stream-lines and velocity vectors are given
in the following figures:

.. figure:: ../examples/ex18_stream-lines.png

	    The stream-lines.

.. figure:: ../examples/ex18_velocity-vectors.png

	    The velocity vectors colored by buoyancy.

The complete source code reads as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/ex18.py
    :linenos:
