docs/tutorial.rst, before:

.. _tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

This is a walkthrough of the basic features of scikit-fem.

Creating meshes
###############

The default constructors of :class:`~skfem.mesh.Mesh`
classes create simple meshes of unit intervals :math:`\Omega = [0,1]^d`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [1]: from skfem.mesh import MeshTri
   In [2]: m = MeshTri()
   In [3]: m
   Out[3]:
   "Triangular mesh with 4 vertices and 2 elements."

There are also a few additional constructors available such as
:meth:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri.init_tensor` and
:meth:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri.init_lshaped`. More importantly, all
mesh types can be loaded from file formats supported by meshio:

.. code-block:: python

   In [4]: from skfem.mesh import Mesh
   In [5]: Mesh.load("docs/examples/square.msh")
   Out[5]:
   "Triangular mesh with 109 vertices and 184 elements."

Meshes can be visualized using :meth:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri.draw`.

Choosing basis functions
########################

The local basis functions are defined in :class:`~skfem.element.Element`
classes. They are combined with meshes to create
:class:`~skfem.assembly.GlobalBasis` objects, such as
:class:`~skfem.assembly.InteriorBasis` and :class:`~skfem.assembly.FacetBasis`,
that contain global basis functions evaluated at global quadrature points:

.. code-block:: python

   In [1]: from skfem import MeshTri, ElementTriP2, InteriorBasis
   In [2]: m = MeshTri()
   In [3]: m.refine(3)
   In [4]: basis = InteriorBasis(m, ElementTriP2())

Here :class:`~skfem.element.ElementTriP2` refers to the quadratic Lagrange
finite element for triangular meshes.  You can control the integration order via
a keyword argument:

.. code-block:: python

   In [5]: basis = InteriorBasis(m, ElementTriP2(), intorder=5)

Now polynomials of order 5 can be integrated exactly by the quadrature
rule. By default, the order of the rule is chosen so that a mass matrix
for the chosen finite element basis can be integrated exactly.

Assembling finite element matrices
##################################

Assembly requires defining forms with the decorators
:func:`~skfem.assembly.bilinear_form` and :func:`~skfem.assembly.linear_form`.
For example, the mass matrix can be assembled as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   In [6]: from skfem import bilinear_form, asm
   In [7]: @bilinear_form
      ...: def mass(u, du, v, dv, w):
      ...:     return u * v
      ...:
   In [8]: asm(mass, basis)
   Out[8]:
   """<289x289 sparse matrix of type '<class 'numpy.float64'>'
   with 3073 stored elements in Compressed Sparse Row format>"""

In the definition of the form ``mass``, ``u`` refers to the solution values and
``du`` refers to its derivatives, ``v`` and ``dv`` refer to the test function
values and derivatives, and ``w`` contains any additional variables such as the
global coordinates (``w.x``) and the local mesh parameters (``w.h``).

The number of arguments required in the form definition depends on the type of
element.  In particular, the number of positional arguments in the bilinear form
definition should be exactly ``2 * len(Element.order) + 1``.

A load vector corresponding to the linear form :math:`F(v)=\int_\Omega x^2 v
\,\mathrm{d}x` is assembled similarly:

.. code-block:: python

   In [9]: @linear_form
      ...: def F(v, dv, w):
      ...:     return w.x[0] ** 2 * v
      ...:
   In [10]: asm(F, basis)
   Out[11]: array([-1.35633681e-06,  9.22309028e-05, -5.42534722e-06,  ...])

Setting essential boundary conditions
#####################################

The simplest way of obtaining degrees-of-freedom corresponding to a specific
boundary is through :meth:`~skfem.assembly.GlobalBasis.get_dofs`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [1]: from skfem import MeshTri, ElementTriP2, InteriorBasis
   In [2]: basis = InteriorBasis(MeshTri.init_lshaped(), ElementTriP2())
   In [3]: basis.get_dofs(lambda x: x[0]==0.0)
   Out[3]: Dofs(nodal={'u': array([0, 2, 4])}, facet={'u': array([ 9, 11])}, edge={}, interior={})

This result tells us that when assembling matrices and vectors using ``basis``
object, the rows 0, 2 and 4 correspond to the degrees-of-freedom at the vertices
of the elements on the boundary :math:`x=0`, and the rows 9 and 11 correspond to
the degrees-of-freedom at the facets of the elements on the boundary :math:`x=0`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [4]: from skfem.models.poisson import laplace, unit_load
   In [5]: A, b = asm(laplace, basis), asm(unit_load, basis)
   In [6]: A
   Out[6]:
   """<21x21 sparse matrix of type '<class 'numpy.float64'>'
   with 165 stored elements in Compressed Sparse Row format>"""

   In [7]: b
   Out[7]:
   array([3.12250226e-16, 8.06646416e-17, 8.06646416e-17, 1.61329283e-16,
          1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16,
          1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01,
          3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 1.66666667e-01,
          1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01,
          1.66666667e-01])

The corresponding degrees-of-freedom can be eliminated from the linear
system, e.g., with the help of :func:`skfem.utils.condense`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [10]: condense(A, b, D=basis.get_dofs(lambda x: x[0]==0.0).all())
   Out[10]:
   ("""<16x16 sparse matrix of type '<class 'numpy.float64'>'
    with 86 stored elements in Compressed Sparse Row format>""",
    array([8.06646416e-17, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16,
           1.61329283e-16, 1.66666667e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01,
           3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01,
           1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01]))

The previous commands cause the corresponding degrees-of-freedom to be zero.
In order to set them to prescribed values, you can experiment with the
different keyword arguments of :func:`skfem.utils.condense`; c.f. the
examples.

Solving linear systems
######################

Postprocessing the results
##########################

Commit message:

Begin tutorial on linear system and add expand-kwarg to condense

docs/tutorial.rst, after:

.. _tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

This is a walkthrough of the basic features of scikit-fem.

Creating meshes
###############

The default constructors of :class:`~skfem.mesh.Mesh`
classes create simple meshes of unit intervals :math:`\Omega = [0,1]^d`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [1]: from skfem.mesh import MeshTri
   In [2]: m = MeshTri()
   In [3]: m
   Out[3]:
   "Triangular mesh with 4 vertices and 2 elements."

There are also a few additional constructors available such as
:meth:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri.init_tensor` and
:meth:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri.init_lshaped`. More importantly, all
mesh types can be loaded from file formats supported by meshio:

.. code-block:: python

   In [4]: from skfem.mesh import Mesh
   In [5]: Mesh.load("docs/examples/square.msh")
   Out[5]:
   "Triangular mesh with 109 vertices and 184 elements."

Meshes can be visualized using :meth:`skfem.mesh.MeshTri.draw`.

Choosing basis functions
########################

The local basis functions are defined in :class:`~skfem.element.Element`
classes. They are combined with meshes to create
:class:`~skfem.assembly.GlobalBasis` objects, such as
:class:`~skfem.assembly.InteriorBasis` and :class:`~skfem.assembly.FacetBasis`,
that contain global basis functions evaluated at global quadrature points:

.. code-block:: python

   In [1]: from skfem import MeshTri, ElementTriP2, InteriorBasis
   In [2]: m = MeshTri()
   In [3]: m.refine(3)
   In [4]: basis = InteriorBasis(m, ElementTriP2())

Here :class:`~skfem.element.ElementTriP2` refers to the quadratic Lagrange
finite element for triangular meshes.  You can control the integration order via
a keyword argument:

.. code-block:: python

   In [5]: basis = InteriorBasis(m, ElementTriP2(), intorder=5)

Now polynomials of order 5 can be integrated exactly by the quadrature
rule. By default, the order of the rule is chosen so that a mass matrix
for the chosen finite element basis can be integrated exactly.

Assembling finite element matrices
##################################

Assembly requires defining forms with the decorators
:func:`~skfem.assembly.bilinear_form` and :func:`~skfem.assembly.linear_form`.
For example, the mass matrix can be assembled as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   In [6]: from skfem import bilinear_form, asm
   In [7]: @bilinear_form
      ...: def mass(u, du, v, dv, w):
      ...:     return u * v
      ...:
   In [8]: asm(mass, basis)
   Out[8]:
   """<289x289 sparse matrix of type '<class 'numpy.float64'>'
   with 3073 stored elements in Compressed Sparse Row format>"""

In the definition of the form ``mass``, ``u`` refers to the solution values and
``du`` refers to its derivatives, ``v`` and ``dv`` refer to the test function
values and derivatives, and ``w`` contains any additional variables such as the
global coordinates (``w.x``) and the local mesh parameters (``w.h``).

The number of arguments required in the form definition depends on the type of
element.  In particular, the number of positional arguments in the bilinear form
definition should be exactly ``2 * len(Element.order) + 1``.

A load vector corresponding to the linear form :math:`F(v)=\int_\Omega x^2 v
\,\mathrm{d}x` is assembled similarly:

.. code-block:: python

   In [9]: @linear_form
      ...: def F(v, dv, w):
      ...:     return w.x[0] ** 2 * v
      ...:
   In [10]: asm(F, basis)
   Out[11]: array([-1.35633681e-06,  9.22309028e-05, -5.42534722e-06,  ...])

Setting essential boundary conditions
#####################################

The simplest way of obtaining degrees-of-freedom corresponding to a specific
boundary is through :meth:`~skfem.assembly.GlobalBasis.get_dofs`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [1]: from skfem import MeshTri, ElementTriP2, InteriorBasis
   In [2]: basis = InteriorBasis(MeshTri.init_lshaped(), ElementTriP2())
   In [3]: basis.get_dofs(lambda x: x[0]==0.0)
   Out[3]: Dofs(nodal={'u': array([0, 2, 4])}, facet={'u': array([ 9, 11])}, edge={}, interior={})

This result tells us that when assembling matrices and vectors using ``basis``
object, the rows 0, 2 and 4 correspond to the degrees-of-freedom at the vertices
of the elements on the boundary :math:`x=0`, and the rows 9 and 11 correspond to
the degrees-of-freedom at the facets of the elements on the boundary :math:`x=0`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [4]: from skfem.models.poisson import laplace, unit_load
   In [5]: A, b = asm(laplace, basis), asm(unit_load, basis)
   In [6]: A
   Out[6]:
   """<21x21 sparse matrix of type '<class 'numpy.float64'>'
   with 165 stored elements in Compressed Sparse Row format>"""

   In [7]: b
   Out[7]:
   array([3.12250226e-16, 8.06646416e-17, 8.06646416e-17, 1.61329283e-16,
          1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16,
          1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01,
          3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 1.66666667e-01,
          1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01,
          1.66666667e-01])

The corresponding degrees-of-freedom can be eliminated from the linear
system, e.g., with the help of :func:`skfem.utils.condense`.

.. code-block:: python

   In [10]: condense(A, b, D=basis.get_dofs(lambda x: x[0]==0.0).all())
   Out[10]:
   ("""<16x16 sparse matrix of type '<class 'numpy.float64'>'
    with 86 stored elements in Compressed Sparse Row format>""",
    array([8.06646416e-17, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16, 1.61329283e-16,
           1.61329283e-16, 1.66666667e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01,
           3.33333333e-01, 3.33333333e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01,
           1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01, 1.66666667e-01]))

The previous commands cause the corresponding degrees-of-freedom to be zero.
In order to set them to prescribed values, you can experiment with the
different keyword arguments of :func:`skfem.utils.condense`; c.f. the
examples.

Solving linear systems
######################

The assembly routines output either scipy sparse matrices or numpy arrays.
These can be used, e.g., together with any scipy linear algebra routines.  For
convenience, we have wrapped some of the most commonly used scipy functions into
:func:`skfem.utils.solve`.




Postprocessing the results
##########################
